Time, 152, Washington, D.C., Office of the
Oceanography. Admiral Snyder, would you explain
to us how you first developed an interest in the
sea? What drew you towards the oceans themselves?
Well, do you mean towards oceanography or towards
the Navy? Towards the oceans. What made you decide
to be a career naval man? Well, my parents, my
father was a Methodist minister, and he was the
fifth generation Methodist minister, and I
didn't want to go into the ministry, and For some
weird reason, as a kid grows up, he wants to be a
fireman. I wanted to be a Navy man. So when I was five
years old, Senator Gerald P. Nye, who was one of
these Republican isolationists who stayed
forever in North Dakota, appointed me to the
United States Naval Academy for 1945. Enter in the
year, I'm sorry, enter in the year 1942. And this
was circa 1930 that he appointed me. I worked
towards that. We built a retirement home outside.
My father built a retirement home outside of
Annapolis. I went in one year earlier than the
senator had appointed me under a civil service
competitive and always wanted to be in the Navy. I
certainly never regretted a day of not having made
that decision. Why did Gerald Nye appoint you 12
years in advance? In North Dakota, they didn't
even know about the Navy. They always knew West
Point and the senatorials. Each senator had two
seats in both West Point and the Naval Academy
before World War II and two from each of the Each of
the congressmen had two. And the appointments to
the Naval Academy went begging. The appointments
to West Point were very competitive. And my father
was the district superintendent. And I guess that
in those days, before World War II, almost all,
about 75% now, maybe you're wrong on this figure,
but a significant number, over 51% of the
appointees to the Naval Academy were political.
Now they're almost all, even if they're
political, they're all competitive on civil
service basis because so many people want to go.
And when... Well, at Annapolis, did you have any
drawings toward it? Were you guided towards
something like oceanography, for example? Did
you assume to be a line officer? No, I had always
wanted to be in nuclear physics for some weird
reason. I can't explain exactly why. And it was
even before the H-bomb, or the A-bomb, rather,
that I'd wanted to be there. I'd always wanted to do
graduate work. And I think that's a function of the
parentage I had, that there was a tremendous drive
to get advanced degree. My father had a PhD and a
DDS. The whole family was sort of
education-happy, if you know what I mean, in that
generation. I'd wanted to be in nuclear physics.
When I graduated from the Naval Academy, I thought
I wanted to be in flight training. My wife did not
want me to be in flight training, so I went through
indoctrination of flight training, then went to
sea and never had a second thought about going into
aviation, never had any desire to go into
submarines and wanted to be a destroyer, a tin can
driver. Right after the war, I put in to go to
postgraduate school at MIT to get a a doctor's
degree in nuclear physics. I was turned down on the
grounds I hadn't had enough sea duty. And each time
I got eligible to be a principal and was selected to
be a principal for postgraduate education, I
would end up by having a job where nobody would
release me. I finally got into nuclear physics
through the back door by a weird rule in the Navy
that doesn't permit ensigns, that's the lowest
rank, to serve on shore duty. A young officer who
was an ensign was serving at Los Alamos, New Mexico
in the nuclear physics program. They found out
what the law was, so they ordered me. And I was then a
Lieutenant JG to his replacement. And by the time I
got there, he had already been promoted. But
anyhow, I went out there. I was going to go to
postgraduate school that year, so I went to Los
Alamos, New Mexico instead. I stayed there under,
I think my orders were classified. My classified
orders told me I was to work on the bomb project. My
unclassified orders said I was to go to the
University of New Mexico in an NROTC program. I
went and worked at Los Alamos, New Mexico as a,
first a staff assistant, and then, I can't
remember the exact title, but then a staff member.
I was never in uniform, but I was working on the
initiator for the hydrogen weapon at that time,
and had always wanted to go to school, and was still
putting in for school at that particular point in
life. I stayed there, I believe, two years, and
then went to sea for a year in order to get the
adequate necessary sea time. And then I went to
Naval Postgraduate System and then went to MIT,
but did not complete a PhD. I was only allowed two
years there, and it took a minimum of four at that
time. So I ended up with a master's degree in
nuclear physics. Came back, went through various
phases of sea duty, then was assigned in my shore
job, my next shore job, was assigned to be the
Polaris reentry body systems officer because of
my nuclear physics background, because of my
assignment in Los Alamos, and because Admiral
Rickover wouldn't permit an assignment of a
nuclear submarine if they weren't too scarce to
take the job. So although not being submarine
qualified, my job there was Polaris reentry body
systems design officer at Lockheed in
California, and also the atomic energy
representative on the Polaris program in circa
1958. I did that job, then I went to War college and I
went to see in command of a destroyer and while I was
in command of a destroyer The assistant secretary
of the Navy for research and development was
attempting to fill a billet for special assistant
here in Washington and Again, Admiral Rickover
had not enough qualified officers to fill his
requirements at sea So very few of them were
allowed to go ashore So again, I got involved in
what I would consider submarine business, even
though I was not a qualified submariner And during
the meantime, during all this history, I'd also
been interviewed by Admiral Rickover, and I'd
been rejected by the admiral for command of the
Bainbridge or executive officer of the Long
Beach. I'm not sure which job. I had always wanted
to do that. In 1958, I'd put a letter in requesting
command of the first nuclear power destroyer
circa 1960, which was about the time I was
interviewed by Admiral Rickover. I then was
accepted by the assistant secretary the Navy to be
his special assistant. I'm not sure exactly why he
accepted me. He asked me if I'd had any tour duty in
Washington. I said no. He asked me what I thought
about the Bureau of Ordinance, and I said it ought
to be reorganized. He asked me what I thought about
the Bureau of Ships, and I said I thought it should
be abolished or combined. Maybe it was I was a
maverick. I don't know for sure. I then went back to
the Brownson. My memory here is a little bit hazy.
It was circa April 63. The thresher was lost right
off of where I was with my ship, but my ship was on its
way to the Navy yard. So I came down and reported to
the assistant secretary on temporary duty, even
though I was not to be permanently assigned to him
until June or July, and started taking over the
secretarial responsibility for oceanography,
if you will, by accident. And I suppose that it's a
fair statement that since April of 63, My primary
job ashore in the Navy has, in fact, been
oceanography. And I've been closely associated
from that day forward. I have a couple of follow-up
questions I should like to ask right here. First of
all, with which assistant secretary were you
attached? The first assistant secretary, Dr.
Wakeman. I've actually served for every
assistant secretary for R&D because of the timing
involved and because of Dr. Frosch stayed so long.
He was still here when I came back from Vietnam. Dr.
Wakeland was the first assistant secretary. I
believe he served five years less five days. He was
the one who was instrumental in setting up the
Interagency Committee on Oceanography. It was he
who went to Mr. Eisenhower, who was then president
of the United States, and got the president
interested in oceanography. It was he who
encouraged the Navy to participate with the other
agencies and with the academic institutions to
significantly increase their budgets in
oceanography. And I think he could be properly
really referred to as almost the founder of major
oceanographic programs in the federal
government. That would be my assessment. Perhaps
it's biased from the fact I worked for him. But I
think without him, we certainly wouldn't be where
we were today in spite of the National Academy
report and in spite of other things. But I think he
was the driving force in the bureaucracy that was
interested. Even though he was responsible for
all of Navy research and development, including
weapon systems, he put a significant amount of
time. He almost was the kind of individual who put a
40-hour work week on four or five separate
subjects. And I was his specialist assistant for
oceanography, submarines, Polaris, and a few
other side things. And I put at least 60 hours a week
in oceanography. And it was a very interesting
time in oceanography because there was no
competition in a bureaucratic sense. The Navy
felt, under Wakeman's leadership, that so much
had to be done that they were not concerned who did
it. The Navy felt that it needed to be
significantly expanded. When I say in the Navy,
I'm speaking of Jim Wakeman, because the Navy has
so many problems, it never knows which problem is
on top other than the one at the critical time.
Wakeman left, and Dr. Morse came. And I served the
full two years with Dr. Morse when he was assistant
secretary. And I served one year plus maybe six
months with Dr. Frosch, who relieved Dr. Morse.
Then I went to sea in Vietnam. I came back, had a
tour, continued tour at sea in Newport, Rhode
Island, made admiral, spent about six or seven
months as admiral's bill at Norfolk. And Dr.
Frosch asked me to come back and relieve Admiral
Behrens as oceanographer, if Admiral Behrens
left. And when that happened, I kept both jobs till
about June. And I've been here full time since June
of 70, I guess it is. And there's been some
controversy, which I'm sure you're aware of, in
the interim and so forth. Exactly what did you do in
Vietnam? I need this with a specific
oceanography. I did no specific oceanography in
Vietnam except looking for several downed
aircraft. The job I had in Vietnam was commanding
officer of the last battleship, the New Jersey,
which was activated. It was a joke, but it was
covered, and I can't ever find the piece of paper,
but it was covered in the ships of oceanography as
the world's largest oceanographic ship, and I
think there were several jokes about how quiet it
was because the machinery was 1,500 men pulling on
ropes, but we had a full suit of oceanographic
equipment on board except a submersible. We put a
submersible on board and it was taken off because
nobody wanted us to have it. We had handheld sonars
and we had salvage and survival gear, but we were so
contained on the demilitarized DMZ, that's the
demilitarized zone, by the Army and the Marine
Corps that they were so imbued with a capability of
this piece of artillery that I never got a chance to
play games, as I would call it, by playing with
oceanography. And then you, after this tour of
duty in Vietnam, then you come back and... No, then
I go to Newport, Rhode Island, where I was chief of
staff to the destroyer force, which was an
administrative job, plus trying to get them to do
things. I was interested in doing a lot of work in
anti-submarine warfare, trying to get the Navy
back in oceanography from a combatant side of the
viewpoint. And then when I made admiral, I became
head of the training command of the Navy east of the
Mississippi. The Navy has two training commands,
east and west of Mississippi. So I had charge of all
the Navy schoolhouses and so forth east of
Mississippi. and that gave me some chance to
exercise oceanography, but not really greatly.
Would you characterize your developing interest
in oceanography primarily through
anti-submarine warfare, since you've always
been a destroyer man? No, I would characterize it
by falling into it with the thresher going down and
being put in it under the leadership of Wakeman,
and I think anybody that's been subject to Mr.
Wakeman's leadership sort of gets part of his
enthusiasm wiped off on him, and I think the
challenge of the of oceanography, once you see it,
is certainly clear to me. Now, let's be sure you and
I understand what we mean by oceanography. In the
Navy, oceanography is very clearly defined. It's
not anywhere else, but it surely is in the Navy, and
I even wrote the definition of that and finally got
the Secretary of the Navy to sign it, and it's very
broad in the Navy. It covers so much that when the
Secretary first looked at it, he said, you're
writing a charter for the Chief of Naval
Operations. We'll have to change a few words. What
it basically is is all that science, technology,
operations, engineering that is necessary to
develop and exploit the world's oceans for
military and other national needs except for
weapon systems design. But then, on the other
hand, it includes how does the weapon system
operate in the environment and how do you use the
weapon system if it's an underwater weapon
system, for example. So it's pretty inclusive,
even though In dollars, it isn't advertised as
much more than $200 million. You probably have $2
billion underneath of the tip of that iceberg in
anti-submarine warfare surveillance and things
like that. A question that's anticipating things
in the future we're speaking of, really. But the
charge has been that the Navy has become less and
less interested in pure science in terms of R&D and
more and more interested in specific sciences,
that is, sciences which would... aid the Navy in
military affairs only. That's called the
Mansfield Amendment. That's right, exactly what
that's called. I think that when you say the Navy, I
think you always have to be a little bit careful. I
live in the Navy, so the Navy is like any other
organization. There are at least 12 different
voices in the Navy. I think that what they mean is a
true statement, except in oceanography. An
interesting thing about oceanography is no one
has ever argued the Mansfield Amendment in
oceanography. Many of the people working in the
Office of Naval Research in order to feel that
their program is very solid, have changed titles
and changed emphasis to make the amount of work
they do more specific towards the acoustical side
or the physical side. I think that this is a normal
thing to occur when you take history and you go back
far enough. The Navy was the major supporter of
ocean science, basic science, basic research.
Today, I forget the exact figures. We could look
them up, but I think the Navy is just like about 25%
of the national support, and the National Science
Foundation is probably more like 40 or 45. NOAA, if
you count the Sea Grant, is probably another 15,
and then the states are probably another 10, and
there's probably another 2% from industry or
catch can. I think it is very clear, and I've had
this argued and discussed, that at the policy
level, the Navy has never exercised the Mansfield
Amendment or felt it necessary in oceanography.
It has in computer technology, electronics,
nuclear physics, et cetera. And I think the reason
that they don't in oceanography is probably the
similarity of everything one does in the ocean.
And I would characterize that as the single
environment that I've run into in my lifetime that
everything you do is a function of the
environment. By that I mean, if you go into outer
space, it's a step function of, let's be
hypothetical about it, it's a step function of one
atmosphere on Earth and zero atmospheres in
space. If you go in the ocean, what is it, one
atmosphere per 32 feet of salt water? Something
like that, which means that if you go down to 1,000
feet, it doesn't make a damn bit of difference
whether you're tying up a Christmas tree or you're
putting a surveillance station or you're
listening to a listening device or you're putting
a pipeline. The difficulty of doing the job is
measured by the difficulty of the environment as
opposed to the difficulty of the job. Many people
will argue this, but I think those that have been at
sea and tried to go down deep will concede that
picking up pieces of the thresher is no different
than picking up a manganese nodule. The only
difference is if you ever get out of science and get
into practical utilization, then you will
specify a different system for picking up nodules
than picking up pieces of pipe, for example, but
the prototype or the research and development or
the science necessary to do it are identical. The
science doesn't know. I think a classic example is
using the BTs, the temperature versus depth, for
anti-submarine warfare and using it for location
of tuna fish. And we have, as I'm sure you're aware,
very quietly made arrangements with many of the US
tuna fishing industries to jointly work with us.
We have to be careful about this because they are
perhaps as proprietary or as...
They don't want other people to know what they're
doing, just like an oil company doesn't, and I
think even more so perhaps than the Navy. Now, is it
fair to say then that in terms of reference to the
Mansfield Amendment, that you feel as if Navy
ought to be broad spread in terms of
experimentation with oceanography?
Absolutely. The only problem is that If you have
only $30 million and you have $90 million worth of
work to do, you have to put your $30 million towards
the highest priority projects. And you can argue
that there's no such thing as a high priority
project in basic science, but that isn't quite
true in oceanography. We do have weapon systems
and ships and things already built that don't know
how to be used in the ocean. They can be basically
used, but you don't know how to use them to their
maximum efficiency. We have weapon systems that
we still could make them maybe 20, 30, 40, 50% more
effective if we understood more about the
physical processes in the ocean and so forth. Of
course, the maps we use, the depth maps, which we
use on occasion for navigational purposes, The
more accurate we can make them, the better they are
for navigational purposes. And of course,
everybody in the ocean, whether you be a
scientist, an engineer, or a developer, has got to
have a map. And if you're working off the bottom,
you better know what the bottom looks like. So the
similarity here is so identical. I think an
interesting thing that I was talking to the new
undersecretary about just on the trip down to
Mississippi, was something that I don't think
that he recognized, and that is that
interestingly enough in scientific
oceanography, and by that I mean university
oceanography, that the measurements made by the
scientists are fed in real time directly to the
computer the Navy runs at Fleet Numerical in
Monterey and fed to the fleet because we are so
lacking in knowledge of the ocean that we are in
fact using basic science as an operational tool,
which is not true in electronics, physics,
mathematics, or the other things that the Office
of Naval Research, for example, on the scientific
side is involved in. And I don't know how to
articulate this except that we don't yet have the
mathematical model of the ocean, so we're still in
the sort of wandering stage where we can derive
beneficial results from an operational
standpoint by just knowing what the temperature
versus depth or temperature versus salinity or
the estimated acoustical range or the sea state
is, that we haven't gotten ourselves to a point
where We don't have to rely on the basic science.
And I have programs which, if you were looking at
the measurement side of the program, you wouldn't
be able to distinguish whether it was being done by
Texas A&M or whether it was being done by the Bureau
of Ordnance on the Mark Wasit weapon system. And
one would be funded out of operational and
maintenance money, which the Navy is very
complicated with seven different congressional
appropriations. The other one would be funded out
of basic research money. And I think this has given
us an advantage in oceanography, which many
people call a disadvantage. But I think it's an
advantage because we can even use warships to
collect oceanographic information and data. And
we're hoping to be able to computerize enough
things and standardize. And again, to
standardize not in an academic sense because
academic people, when you use the word standard,
get frightened or don't want to do it for one reason
or another. But if you could standardize just
instrumentation and calibration for routine
types of measurements that all the scientists use
and also the operators use, I think we'd be a lot
better off. We're having problems in that arena,
but I think the technology of computer technology
and transmission via satellite and
communications in general are without any
question at a point in time where you can do this if
you had the money to set it up. Now, speaking of
standardizing, which we are in a different sort of
way, is I think most people in, for lack of a better
word, political oceanography, most people agree
it was you who first standardized the
oceanographic office here, a sense of bringing
all aspects of naval oceanography into one
central office. Would you agree with that? Well,
let me say that I'm the one who first, not the one who
first tried it, I probably was the one who was in a
better position to get it started. I think Tex
Treadwell was trying, I think everybody, Art
Maxwell was trying, I think, The difference was I
was sitting in the secretary's office, and the
secretary was very interested in not
standardizing but consolidating, I think is a
better word, trying to get a critical mass without
destroying everything. At the same time, you
always can get a bureaucrat's interest by saying,
I'm going to consolidate because he sees savings.
We were not trying to make savings. We were trying
to get more efficient programs. I think we have
failed to consolidate the program. I think we're
making another attempt right now to consolidate
it in Mississippi, and I think it'll be five years.
I think you will have finished your research
project long before you can answer the question,
is that attempt to consolidate going to be
successful? The one up here was only maybe 25% or
30% successful. All right, now, what I should like
for you to do is to describe the way it operated
before you took it over and what you had in mind how
you wished for it to operate when you were through.
Well, I'll have to go back to 1963 when I knew
nothing at all about oceanography and walked into
an office and suddenly discovered that we had lost
a nuclear submarine the first time we'd ever lost
one. We'd lost it with all hands on board, and I
couldn't understand it. I couldn't understand
why here we had a submarine in an operational area
with a surface ship in complete communications
with it, right with it, and didn't know where it
went down exactly. Naval officers seem to think
they know where they are at sea, and they don't have
the foggiest damn idea as far as accuracy is
concerned.
By accuracy, I mean accuracy to be able to use your
sensors. So all of a sudden here I have, I'm given
the responsibility for the secretary, and of
course this is an anomaly in the Navy. Why would we
have a discipline in the Navy that in effect was
managed from the office of the secretary of the
Navy? That is different. To my knowledge, I could
be wrong about that, but no intense bureaucratic
management on any other field has been done by the
Secretary, not even nuclear power. That was done
by Admiral Rickover himself and outside the
Secretary's office. He had some assistance
initially, but the Office of Naval Research is
legally managed by the Secretary, but not really.
The Chief of Naval Research almost runs his
program unhindered. The missile programs got
secretarial attention because they needed it to
get started, but then they were pretty much
managed outside. The other program that got
secretarial attention, I guess perhaps most
notorious, was the Polaris program, and that was
needed because the Navy had never done it. But then
again, you had Admiral Rayburn and Levering Smith
and Dr. Teller who made the contributions that
really did the program. I think oceanography was
never really accepted as... in the Navy as
something that was absolutely necessary.
Hydrography was accepted and the Naval
Oceanographic Office, I believe, Ray Hagen can
give you all of the actual searched history of what
it went through, but it went through basically
charting and it wasn't until I don't really
consider it was until World War II when people
really got in and called things oceanography.
They'll say 1930, 31, 33, but really that's not
true. Really, it was World War II, the submarine
threat, the inability to understand why they'd
see them sometimes and wouldn't other times. And
that put Woods whole in the business. And I think
there's an interesting thing that's never been
true in another discipline, with the possible
exception of the Manhattan Project when it first
started. But in oceanography, it's continued.
Here I walk into a field which I'm new. I mean, I had
nuclear physics and mathematics, so from a novice
scientific standpoint, I'm not a novice. But from
a oceanography standpoint, I'm a novice. And I
suddenly discover that the contributors to the
location of the Thresher are not the operational
Navy or not sort of engineering Navy. They're
mostly basic research people. They're the
academic people plus the Naval Research
Laboratory. I mean, there are operations out
there, but the people we are talking about. And
then I think the thing that fascinated me was then
to discover the next crisis that I personally
faced, and I don't remember exactly the year, but
circa 1966, we lost the The Air Force lost the
hydrogen bomb off of Palomares. And I can honestly
tell you that we received calls from every major US
academic institution instantaneously. I didn't
have to ask them for help. They were on my phone.
Hey, Ed, what can we do to help? That's so unusual in
an operational world. And operational by that, I
don't necessarily confine myself to military,
but even industrial world. Here you have an
academic group that feels obliged to come
forward, and not only feels obliged, but have
better capability, in a sense, than the full
operational Navy. And this was true in the
Thresher case. Now, from the Thresher to the
Palomares bomb, we'd started to move rather
rapidly from an engineering viewpoint, and we had
started to put significant more money into basic
research, and we had started a major program for
shipbuilding to build egg oars. And I think it's
also very interesting to recognize that up until
about four years ago, the Navy provided the only
federally funded ships for the oceanographic
programs in the universities. And the only reason
we're not doing it now is not the Mansfield
Amendment, but it's a very simple problem. The
Navy lost so many ships stricken from the
register, the cost of shipbuilding has gone up so
much that the Navy's requirements are so severe,
they just don't have the damn money to buy the ships
they need like aircraft carriers, so there's
nothing left over for things that you and I feel are
important, but the man who's trying to fight
today's battles hasn't got the money to put on the
future, which I call the future of the country
being the ability to exploit the ocean. But then
I'm very parochial in that view, and I think most of
us are who've worked in the program. Well, the last
ship we built was the one that went to Texas, A&M.
Last one funded by the Navy. And don't forget,
these ships were not funded by Office of Naval
Research. A lot of people think they were. These
ships are funded by the Operational Navy, the same
dollars that buy the combatant submarines and the
combatant aircraft carriers and the combatant
destroyers. And I fought this battle, and I lose in
the dollar. I don't lose in principle, but I lose in
the fact that when you get through today's world,
you haven't the dollar left over. And I think it's
bad, but then I don't know how I'd feel if I were the
chief of naval operations with all the problems
he's got on the shoulders.